doc: Fix/Update the migration guide for Go projects (#3543)
operator-framework/operator-sdk: website/content/en/docs/building-operators/golang/project_migration_guide.md

```

### Migrating the Controllers

In our example, we will migrate the code from `pkg/controller/memcached/memcached_controller.go` to `controllers/memcached_controller.go`. 

Now, the struct Reconcile<Kind> is called <KindReconciler>, so if you have customizations copy the fields from the, 
for example, `ReconcileMemcached` struct to `MemcachedReconciler`.

We’ll need to replace the `// your logic here` in the new layout for our reconcile logic. See that in our example the:

```
func (r *ReconcileMemcached) Reconcile(request reconcile.Request) (reconcile.Result, error) {
```

Is replaced with:

```
func (r *MemcachedReconciler) Reconcile(req ctrl.Request) (ctrl.Result, error) {
```

Note that:

- The **Log** in the new layout has not a variable to be used. In this way, replace:

```go
_ = r.Log.WithValues("memcached", req.NamespacedName)`
```

With:

```go
log := r.Log.WithValues("memcached", req.NamespacedName)
```

And then, you we use `log` instead of `reqLogger`. Example:

```go
log.Info("Memcached resource not found. Ignoring since object must be deleted")
```

- The `r.client.Action` will be replaced with `r.Action`. (e.g replace `r.client.Get` with `r.Get`)

> - The `r.scheme` will be replaced with `r.Scheme`

Author: `Copy all existing Reconcile<Kind> code into the new controller.go file, overwriting the existing Reconcile implementation.` and they try to fix shows pitiful since the imports will not be the same as other nits details. also, they might end up to changing properly the watches implementation. 

I agree that it is not good I will try to come up with a better explanation.

[builder Owns][builder-owns] doc. 

### Setting the RBAC permissions

The RBAC permissions now are configured via [RBAC markers][rbac_markers] whcih will generate and update the manifest files present in `config/rbac/`. See that on top of the `Reconcile()` method we will find them, in our Memcached example 
it will be: 

```go
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=cache.example.com,resources=memcacheds,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=cache.example.com,resources=memcacheds/status,verbs=get;update;patch
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=apps,resources=deployments,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=apps,resources=services,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=pods,verbs=get;list
```

To update `config/rbac/role.yaml` after changing the markers, run `make manifests`.  Also, you might want to configure additional permissions for your project, see [RBAC markers][rbac_markers] doc. 

By default, the projects are `cluster-scoped`. Check that your role is of the `ClusterRole` Kind. For further information check the [operator-scope][operator-scope] doc. 

> **Note** You  would like to check the final result of our [memcached_controller.go][memcached_controller] migrated to the new layout. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the complete migrated `memecached_controller.go` code [here][memcached_controller].
```

> ## Migrating the Main.go

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating `main.go`
```

> If you are using third-party API's in your project for example then, it means that you need to copy your customizations 

Reviewer: Kind of odd that this is the very first thing we say in this section.

from `cmd/manager/main.go` to `main.go`. You’ll also need to ensure all of the needed schemes have been registered.

By checking our new `main.go` we will find that:

- The SDK `leader.Become` was replaced by the [leaderElection][leaderElection]. However, we still able to use the 
previous one as well by adding the [operator-lib][operator-lib] as dependency fo the project.
- The default port used by the metric endpoint binds to from `:8383` to `:8080`. To continue using port `8383`, specify `--metrics-addr=:8383` when you start the operator. 

> 

Reviewer: We also removed all the code for `addMetrics`, so we need to tell people how to get that functionality back (i.e. setup custom watches using `InstrumentedEnqueueRequestForObject` from operator-lib)

Author: Yep. Shows reasonable. However, I think the `InstrumentedEnqueueRequestForObject ` needs to be with the metrics. I will add this.

## Configuring your test environment

> Projects are scaffolded with tests that requires certain Kubernetes server binaries be present locally. In this way, we'll need to setup it locally by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Projects are scaffolded with tests that require the `envtest` Kubrenetes binaries be present locally. To download and configure these binaries, run the following:
```

```sh
curl -sSLo setup_envtest.sh https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/master/scripts/setup_envtest_bins.sh 
chmod +x setup_envtest.sh
eval $(./setup_envtest.sh v1.18.2 v3.4.3)
```

> **Note:** More info can be found [here][env-test-setup].

Reviewer: This section needs to be updated based on the discussion in the Kubebuilder meeting.

## Migrating your tests

> For the new layout you will see that a `controllers/suite_test.go` is created. The project tests are done using [ginkgo](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/) and [gomega](https://onsi.github.io/gomega/), look its imports: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the new layout, you will see that `controllers/suite_test.go` is created. This file contains boilerplate for executing integration tests using `envtest` with [ginkgo](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/) and [gomega](https://onsi.github.io/gomega/).

Operator SDK 1.0.0+ removes support for the legacy test framework and no longer supports the `operator-sdk test` subcommand. All affected tests should be migrated to use `envtest`.
```

```go
import (
...
   	. "github.com/onsi/ginkgo"
   	. "github.com/onsi/gomega"
...
)  

> ```                     

Reviewer: Not necessary to show the imports. They're already in `suite_test.go`.

> SDK has been adopted this stack because it is used in the Kubernetes universe for the projects used by it. To know more about how you can test your controllers see [Writing controller tests][writing-controller-tests]. However, you still able to use the libs that please you to write tests.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Operator SDK project recommends controller-runtime's `envtest` because it has a more active contributor community, it has become more mature than Operator SDK's test framework, and it does not require an actual cluster to run tests, which can be a huge benefit in CI scenarios. 

To learn more about how you can test your controllers, see the documentation about [writing controller tests][writing-controller-tests].
```

> ## Migrating your CR's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating your Custom Resources
```

Now, the CR's are generated in the `/config/samples` so we will need to update them with
the specs required. In our example, we'll copy the specs from `deploy/crds/cache.example.com_v1alpha1_memcached_cr.yaml` 

> to `config/samples/cache_v1alpha1_memcached.yaml`

Reviewer: Custom resource samples are stored in `./config/samples` in the new project structure. Copy the examples from your existing project into this directory. In existing projects, CR files have the format `./deploy/crds/<group>.<domain>_<version>_<kind>_cr.yaml`.

### Configuring your Operator

In case your project has customizations in the `deploy/operator.yaml` then, it needs to be port to 
`config/manager/manager.yaml`. However, note that the following env vars are no longer used. 

> - `OPERATOR_NAME` is deprecated. It is used to define the name for a leader election config map. Operator authors should begin using `--leader-election-id` instead.

Reviewer: This is entirely dependent on whether the developer chose to switch to controller-runtime's leader with lease mechanism or stick with leader for life. This needs to be re-written to explain that.

Also, `--leader-election-id` is not a flag in Go operators. The `LeaderElectionID` value is scaffolded and hardcoded into `main.go`

> - `POD_NAME` was used to enable a particular pod to hold the leader election lock when the Helm operator used the leader for life mechanism. Helm operator now uses controller-runtime's leader with lease mechanism, and `POD_NAME` is no longer necessary.

Reviewer: See above comment about leader election.

## Exporting metrics 

If you are using metrics and would like to keep them exported see that the `addMetrics()` function is no longer 
generated in the `main.go`. To export the metrics you will need to configure it in the 

> `config/default/kustomization.yaml`. Please see the [metrics][metrics] doc to know how you can perform this setup. 

Reviewer: Most of the metrics setup is already done in `config/default/kustomization.yaml`. The only additional piece that users might want is the setup of the Prometheus `ServiceMonitor`. Let's be explicit about these details.

## Generating Manifests and Building the operator

> - Run `make manifests` to generate your files
> - Run `make docker-build IMG=<some-registry>/<project-name>:tag` to build your project

Reviewer: Let's mention the old commands so users see how things map.
```suggestion
- `operator-sdk generate crds` is replaced with `make manifests`, which generates CRDs and RBAC rules.
- `operator-sdk build` is replaced with `make docker-build IMG=<some-registry>/<project-name>:tag`.
```

- Note that you can use `make docker-push IMG=<some-registry>/<project-name>:tag` to push
 your new image to the repository.
 
**Note** The Dockerfile image also changes and now it is `distroless` and still been 

> `rootless`. You might need to port some customizations made in your old Dockerfile as well. 

Reviewer: It's also a multi-stage Dockerfile now (but users can change it to work however they want).

It might be worth one more sentence that explains that the UBI minimal image can be used by replacing the distrolesS:nonroot base image in the Dockerfile.

> ## Testing the project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Verifying the migration
```

> The project can now be built, and the operator can be deployed on-cluster. For further steps regarding the deployment of the operator, creation of custom resources and cleaning up of resources, see the [quickstart guide][quickstart].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project can now be built, and the operator can be deployed on-cluster. For further steps regarding the deployment of the operator, creation of custom resources, and cleaning up of resources, see the [quickstart guide][quickstart].
```

# Overview

This guide walks through an example of migrating a simple memcached-operator which was built by following the 
[legacy quick-start][quickstart-legacy] to the new layout.

The motivations for the new layout are related to bringing more flexibility to users and 
part of the process to [Integrating Kubebuilder and Operator SDK][integration-doc].

## What was changed
 
The `deploy` directory was replaced with the `config` directory including a new layout of Kubernetes manifests files:
- CRD's manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/crd/bases`
- CR's manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/samples`
- Controller manifest `deploy/operator.yaml` was replaced for `config/manager/manager.yaml` 
- RBAC's manifests in `deploy` are in `config/rbac/`

The `build/Dockerfile` directory was replaced by the `Dockerfile` in the root directory.
The `pkg/apis` and `pkg/controllers` are now in the root directory. 
The `cmd/manager/main.go` is now in the root directory. 

## What is new

To bring a little context, projects are now scaffold using

- [kustomize][kustomize] to perform the configurations 

> - Makefile with helper and which brings more flexibility

Author: ```suggestion
- Makefile with helpers which brings more flexibility and allows customizations
```

- New helper and options to work with WebHooks
- Protect by default via [kube-auth-proxy][kube-auth-proxy] 

> - Prometheus metrics now are configured by [kustomize][kustomize] files

Author: ```suggestion
- Prometheus metrics configured via [kustomize][kustomize] 
```

- Prometheus metrics now are configured by [kustomize][kustomize] files
- [EnvTest][envtest] and suite of tests

## How to migrate

The easy migration path is to create a new project from the scratch and let the tool scaffold the files properly and then, 
just replace with your customizations and implementations. Following an example. 

**Note:** It is recommended that you have your project upgraded to the latest SDK release version before following the 
steps of this guide to migrate to new layout.

## Creating a new project

Let's check our domain first for we create a new project which will have the same `<group>.<domain>/<version>` API's. 
We can find this value in the CRD's, see:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: memcacheds.cache.example.com
spec:
  group: cache.example.com
...
```

Then, let's create the same project with the same domain but with the Go plugin:

```sh
$ mkdir $GOPATH/src/memcached-operator
$ cd $GOPATH/src/memcached-operator
$ operator-sdk init --domain example.com
```

**Note** If you be outside of the `$GOPATH` then activate the go module support by running `$ export GO111MODULE=on` 

> and use the flag `--repo` to specify the the name to use for go module (e.g., `github.com/user/repo`).

Author: ```suggestion
and use the flag `--repo` to specify the name to use for go module (e.g., `github.com/user/repo`).
```

> **Note** If you be outside of the `$GOPATH` then activate the go module support by running `$ export GO111MODULE=on` 
> and use the flag `--repo` to specify the the name to use for go module (e.g., `github.com/user/repo`).

Author: ```suggestion
**Note** If you are outside of the `$GOPATH` then, activate the go module support by running `$ export GO111MODULE=on` and use the flag `--repo` to specify the name to use for go module (e.g., `github.com/user/repo`).

and use the flag `--repo` to specify the name to use for go module (e.g., `github.com/user/repo`). Note that, you’ll need to run go mod init <modulename> in order to tell the base import path of your module. 
```

// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=apps,resources=deployments,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=apps,resources=services,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=pods,verbs=get;list
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=services,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
```

However, you might want to configure additional permissions for your project, see [RBAC markers][rbac_markers] doc for more information. 

**Note** You  would like to check the final result of our [memcached_controller.go][memcached_controller] migrated to the new layout. 

## Migrating the Main.go

If you are using third-party API's in your project for example then, it means that you need to copy your customizations from `cmd/manager/main.go` to `main.go`. You’ll also need to ensure all of the needed schemes have been registered.

By checking our new `main.go` we will find that:

- The SDK `leader.Become` was replaced by the [leaderElection][leaderElection]. However, we still able to use the previous one as well by adding the [operator-lib][operator-lib] as dependency fo the project. 

> - The default value for `MetricsBindAddress` is now `8080` instead of `8383`. However, note that it is now configurable via the flag `--metrics-addr`. 

Author: ```suggestion
- The default value for `MetricsBindAddress` is now `8080` instead of `8383`. However, note that it is now configurable via the flag `--metrics-addr`. To continue using port 8383, specify `--metrics-addr=:8383` when you start the operator.
```

# Overview

> This guide walks through an example of migrating a simple nginx-operator which was built by following the 

Author: ops .. tks 👍 good cather.

The `build/Dockerfile` directory was replaced by the `Dockerfile` in the root directory.
The `pkg/apis` and `pkg/controllers` are now in the root directory. 
The `cmd/manager/main.go` is now in the root directory. 

## What is new

To bring a little context, projects are now scaffold using

- [kustomize][kustomize] to perform the configurations 
- Makefile with helper and which brings more flexibility
- New helper and options to work with WebHooks
- Protect by default via [kube-auth-proxy][kube-auth-proxy] 
- Prometheus metrics now are configured by [kustomize][kustomize] files
- [EnvTest][envtest] and suite of tests

## How to migrate

The easy migration path is to create a new project from the scratch and let the tool scaffold the files properly and then, 
just replace with your customizations and implementations. Following an example. 

**Note**
It is recommended that you have your project upgraded to the latest SDK release version before following the steps of this guide to migrate to Kubebuilder layout.

## Creating a new project

Let's create the same project but with the Go plugin:

```sh
$ mkdir $GOPATH/src/memcached-operator
$ cd $GOPATH/src/memcached-operator

> $ operator-sdk init --domain example.com

Author: The domain is important to keep the same domain/group/version in the API's 
I will clarify that.

```

> **Note** If you be outside of the `$GOPATH` than, activate the go module support by running `$ export GO111MODULE=on` and use the flag `--repo` to specify the the name to use for go module (e.g., `github.com/user/repo`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note** If you be outside of the `$GOPATH` then activate the go module support by running `$ export GO111MODULE=on` and use the flag `--repo` to specify the the name to use for go module (e.g., `github.com/user/repo`).
```

## Migrating APIs and Controllers

Now, let's create the same API's that we have in our project with the legacy layout. In
 case of memcached operator, a new API for kind `Memcached` and group/version  `cache/v1aplha1` is created with:

```sh
$ operator-sdk create api --group cache --version v1alpha1 --kind Memcached
```

Since in the [quick-start][quickstart]
we created the  API and a Controller for the Memcached Kind then, we will press `[y]` for both cases which will result in `api/v1alpha1/memcached_types.go` and `controller/memcached_controller.go` created. 

**Note** Ensure that you use the same values for the flags to recreate the same Go project with the same API's. If you have
more than one API(CRD) you can add them via `operator-sdk create api` command. For further information check the [quick-start][quickstart]. 

## Porting the code 

The next step will be port our code to the new project. 

### Migrating API's

Now, let’s copy the API definition from `pkg/apis/<group>/<version>/<kind>_types.go` to `api/<version>/<kind>_types.go`. Note that is only required to copy the code from the Spec and Status fields.

> **What to do about the Markers**

Reviewer 2: Maybe hyperlinking **Marker** here to its definition is a good idea. Newbies can click and know right away.

type MemcachedSpec struct {
	// INSERT ADDITIONAL SPEC FIELDS - desired state of cluster
	// Important: Run "make" to regenerate code after modifying this file

	// Size is the size of the memcached deployment
	Size int32 `json:"size"`
}

// MemcachedStatus defines the observed state of Memcached
type MemcachedStatus struct {
	// INSERT ADDITIONAL STATUS FIELD - define observed state of cluster
	// Important: Run "make" to regenerate code after modifying this file

	// Nodes are the names of the memcached pods
	// +listType=set
	Nodes []string `json:"nodes"`
}

// +kubebuilder:object:root=true

// Memcached is the Schema for the memcacheds API
type Memcached struct {...}

// +kubebuilder:object:root=true
// +kubebuilder:subresource:status

// MemcachedList contains a list of Memcached
type MemcachedList struct {...}
```

### Migrating the Controllers

In our example, we will migrate the code from `pkg/controller/memcached/memcached_controller.go` to `controllers/memcached_controller.go`. 

Now, the struct Reconcile<Kind> is called <KindReconciler>, so if you have customizations copy the fields from the for example `ReconcileMemcached` struct to `MemcachedReconciler`.

> We’ll need replace the `// your logic here` in the new layout for our reconcile logic. See that in our example the:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We’ll need to replace the `// your logic here` in the new layout for our reconcile logic. See that in our example the:
```

I'm not sure there should be "We" or "you" to be used. But let's be consistent in referring the reader

```
func (r *ReconcileMemcached) Reconcile(request reconcile.Request) (reconcile.Result, error) {
```

> Was replace with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is replaced with:
```

```
func (r *MemcachedReconciler) Reconcile(req ctrl.Request) (ctrl.Result, error) {
```

Note that:

> - The Log in the new layout has not an variable to be used. In this way, replace:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The **Log** in the new layout has not a variable to be used. In this way, replace:
```

```go
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=cache.example.com,resources=memcacheds,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=cache.example.com,resources=memcacheds/status,verbs=get;update;patch
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=apps,resources=deployments,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=apps,resources=services,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=pods,verbs=get;list
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=services,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
```

However, you might configure additional permissions for your project then, see [RBAC markers][rbac_markers] doc for further information. 

**Note** You might would like to check the example [[memcached_controller.go]][memcached_controller]. 

## Migrating the Main.go

If you are using third-party API's in your project for example then, it means that you need to copy your customizations from `cmd/manager/main.go` to `cmd/main.go`. You’ll also need to ensure all of the needed schemes have been registered.

> 

Reviewer 3: I think a few more things can be mentioned for the main.go/manager:
* addition of health-probes needs to be added by defining the port it should listen to, preferably it should be done by scaffolding code
* Setting `Namespace` in the controller.Opts similar to WATCH_NAMESPACE for operator-sdk generated code.

Author: Hi @davidkarlsen, 

I added more info. Regards `HealthProbeBindAddress` it is not customization that we described for the legacy layout. So, IMO we need to try also be less verbose as possible and more generic since we will not able to cover all possibilities. However, shows quite intuitive as well that both are the same fie.  

> preferably it should be done by scaffolding code
It shows a great idea wdyt about raise an issue for the repo for we do that? 

> Setting Namespace in the controller.Opts similar to WATCH_NAMESPACE for operator-sdk generated code.
It is described in the operator scope doc. However, I linked it and added more info about that as well as described that these env vars are no longer supported.

Reviewer 3: the legacy layout provided a metrics endpoint, and it had an ´/healthz´ endpoint at port 8686. The new layout misses this ootb.

	})
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}

	err = c.Watch(&source.Kind{Type: &corev1.Service{}}, &handler.EnqueueRequestForOwner{
		IsController: true,
		OwnerType:    &cachev1alpha1.Memcached{},
	})
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}

	return ctrl.NewControllerManagedBy(mgr).
		For(&cachev1alpha1.Memcached{}).
		Complete(r)
}
```

### Setting the RBAC permissions

The RBAC permissions now are configured via markers whcih will generate and update the manifest files present in `config/rbac/`. See that on top of the `Reconcile()` method you will find them. For our Memcache example it will be: 

```go
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=cache.example.com,resources=memcacheds,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=cache.example.com,resources=memcacheds/status,verbs=get;update;patch
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=apps,resources=deployments,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=apps,resources=services,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=pods,verbs=get;list
// +kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=services,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
```

> However, you might configure additional permissions for your project then, see [RBAC markers][rbac_markers] doc for further information. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, you might want to configure additional permissions for your project, see [RBAC markers][rbac_markers] doc for more information. 
```

> **Note** You might would like to check the final result of our [memcached_controller.go][memcached_controller] migrated to the new layout. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note** You  would like to check the final result of our [memcached_controller.go][memcached_controller] migrated to the new layout. 
```

## Migrating the Main.go

> If you are using third-party API's in your project for example then, it means that you need to copy your customizations from `cmd/manager/main.go` to `cmd/main.go`. You’ll also need to ensure all of the needed schemes have been registered.

Reviewer 2: Unlike Previously here we are using "you" to refer the reader

Author: In this case, I do not think that `we` will make sense. Since `we` are not using third-party in the example. However, please feel free to provide any suggestion for this place.
